# Contributing a new benchmarking dataset

This guide walks new contributors through the process of adding a new dataset for SPRAS benchmarking and running SPRAS on that dataset. It is considered a companion to the [SPRAS Contributing Guide](https://spras.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributing/index.html), which walks users through adding and algorithm to the SPRAS software. It is useful, but not necessary, to complete that contributing guide before beginning this one.

Prerequisites
-------------

Before following this guide, a contributor will need

- Familiarity with Python ([Carpentries introduction](https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/))
- Familiarity with Git and GitHub ([Carpentries introduction](https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/))
- Snakemake ([Carpentries introduction](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/workflows-snakemake/)
  or [beginner's guide](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2023-snakemake-slithering-section-1.html))
- The ability to post files to Google Drive

Step 0: Fork the repository and create a branch
-----------------------------------------------

From the [spras-benchmarking repository](https://github.com/Reed-CompBio/spras-benchmarking),
click the "Fork" button in the upper right corner to create a copy of
the repository in your own GitHub account. Do not change the "Repository
name". Then click the green "Create fork" button.

The simplest way to set up SPRAS benchmarking for local development is to clone your
fork of the repository to your local machine. You can do that with a
graphical development environment or from the command line. After
cloning the repository, create a new git branch called
``example-dataset`` for local neighborhood development. In the
following commands, replace the example username ``agitter`` with your
GitHub username.

```
   git clone https://github.com/agitter/spras-benchmarking.git
   git checkout -b example-dataset
```

Then you can make commits and push them to your fork of the repository
on the ``example-dataset`` branch

```
git push origin example-dataset
```

For this example dataset only, you will not merge the changes
back to the original SPRAS benchmarking repository. Instead, you can open a pull
request to your fork so that the SPRAS benchmarking maintainers can still provide
feedback. For example, use the "New pull request" button from
https://github.com/agitter/spras-benchmarking/pulls and set ``agitter/spras-benchmarking`` as both
the base repository and the head repository with ``example-dataset`` as the compare branch.

The [SPRAS Contributing Guide](https://spras.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributing/index.html) also provides instructions so you can push changes to both the Reed-CompBio version of spras-benchmarking and your fork. 

Step 1: Activate the spras environment and install SPRAS as a submdule. 
---------------

This repository depends on SPRAS. If you want to reproduce the results of benchmarking locally,
you will need to setup SPRAS. SPRAS depends on [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) and [Conda](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/). If it is hard to install either of these tools,
a [devcontainer](https://containers.dev/) is available for easy setup.

```sh
conda env create -f spras/environment.yml
conda activate spras
pip install ./spras
```

Adding an example dataset
--------------

The goal of a dataset is to take raw data and produce data to be fed to SPRAS. In this guide, we will add a dataset that is provided in `datasets/example`.

### Generate example data

Generate a fake dataset by running 
This is a fake dataset: the data can be generated by running `datasets/example/raw_generation.py`, where the following artifacts will output:
- `sources.txt`
- `targets.txt`
- `gold-standard.tsv`
- `interactome.tsv`

Unlike in this example, the data used in other datasets comes from other sources (whether that's supplementary info in a paper, or out of
biological databases like UniProt.) These artifacts can be large, and occasionally update, so we store them in Google Drive for caching and download
them when we want to reconstruct a dataset.

Note that the four artifacts above change every time `raw_generation.py` is run. Upload those artifacts to Google Drive in a folder of your choice.
Share the file and allow for _Anyone with the link_ to _View_ the file.

Once shared, copying the URL should look something like:

> https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Agte0Aezext-8jLhGP4GmaF3tS7gHX-h/view?usp=sharing

We always drop the entire `/view?...` suffix, and replace `/file/d/` with `/uc?id=`, which turns the URL to a direct download link, which is internally
downloaded with [gdown](https://github.com/wkentaro/gdown). Those post-processing steps should make the URL now look as so:

> https://drive.google.com/uc?id=1Agte0Aezext-8jLhGP4GmaF3tS7gHX-h

Now, add a directive to `cache/directory.py` under `Contributing`. Since this doesn't have an online URL, this should use `CacheItem.cache_only`, to
indicate that no other online database serves this URL.

Your new directive under the `directory` dictionary should look something as so, with one entry for every artifact:

```python
...,
"Contributing": {
    "interactome.tsv": CacheItem.cache_only(
        name="Randomly-generated contributing interactome",
        cached="https://drive.google.com/uc?id=..."
    ),
    ...
}
```

### Setting up a workflow

Now, we need to make these files SPRAS-compatible. To do this, we'll set up a `Snakefile`, which will handle:
- Artifact downloading
- Script running.

`sources.txt` and `targets.txt` are already in a SPRAS-ready format, but we need to process `gold-standard.tsv` and `interactome.tsv`.

Create a `Snakefile` under your dataset with the top-level directives:

```python
# This provides the `produce_fetch_rules` util to allows us to automatically fetch the Google Drive data.
include: "../../cache/Snakefile"

rule all:
    input:
        # The two files we will be passing to SPRAS
        "raw/sources.txt",
        "raw/targets.txt",
        # The two files we will be processing
        "processed/gold-standard.tsv",
        "processed/interactome.tsv"
```

We'll generate four `fetch` rules, or rules that tell Snakemake to download the data we uploaded to Google Drive earlier.

```python
produce_fetch_rules({
    # The value array is a path into the dictionary from `cache/directory.py`.
    "raw/sources.txt": ["Contributing", "sources.txt"],
    # and so on for targets, gold-standard, and interactome:
    # note that excluding these three stops the Snakemake file from working by design!
    ...
})
```

Create two scripts that make `gold-standard.tsv` and `interactome.tsv` SPRAS-ready, consulting
the [SPRAS file format documentation](https://spras.readthedocs.io/en/latest/output.html). You can use any dependencies inside the top-level
`pyproject.toml`, and you can test out your scripts with `uv run <script>`, an installation requirement from the top-level README.


> [!TIP]
> Getting the current directory of your script prevents path errors. We use the snippet `Path(__file__).parent.resolve()`
> throughout the repository.

Once you have your scripts, add rules that consume the raw data and produce your processed data. For example:

```py
rule interactome:
    input:
        "raw/interactome.tsv"
    output:
        "processed/interactome.tsv"
    shell:
        "uv run scripts/process_interactome.py"
```

Once you do the same for `gold-standard.tsv`, your data pipeline is ready! You can test it with `uv run snakemake --cores 1`.

### Adding to `run_snakemake.sh`

Make sure that your `Snakefile` is run inside the top-level `run_snakemake.sh` file.

### Adding to the SPRAS config

TODO: add note to activate `spras` conda environment.

Since this is a pathway problem and not a disease mining problem, we'll mutate `configs/pra.yaml`. Add your dataset and gold standard to the
configuration. Since this dataset passes in a mix of raw and processed files, it would be best to make the `data_dir` set to `datasets/contributing`,
then refer to individual files when linking node or edge files in the configuration.

To test these, use the `conda` environment from the `spras` submodule to run `snakemake` with SPRAS.

## Making contributions

You can now add your own datasets to the `spras-benchmarking` repo, which will be reviewed by the maintainers. **Check that your data provider isn't already a dataset in `datasets`.** There are some datasets that are able to serve more data, and only use a subset of it: these datasets can be extended for your needs. Code contributions will be licensed using the project's MIT license.

If you wish to contribute to the codebase beyond adding datasets, there are `TODOs` that better enhance the reproducibility and accuracy of datasets or analysis of algorithm outputs, as well as
[open resolvable issues](https://github.com/Reed-CompBio/spras-benchmarking/).

If you want to add an algorithm to SPRAS, refer to the [SPRAS repository](https://github.com/Reed-CompBio/SPRAS) instead. If you want to test your new algorithm you PRed to SPRAS, you can swap out the `spras` submodule that this repository uses with your fork of SPRAS.
